# wrote this right after i woke up and never edited it but like maybe you’d like to hear it, one of these days
> *aka a sleepy treatise on the creation and consumption and giving of art and writing

Every piece of created media, every “classical epic” and old play and novel and published journals and old movie and new show and basement music tape and published sonnet and napkin poem and bathroom stall poem and fanfiction and vlog and video game and Vine and everything, each and every one is a creation that is built by an ordinary human with flaws and hurts and their own experiences and joys and limitations out of a network of experiences and words and tools THEY have to try to get a meaning and moment and message and feeling across a void that has no bridge yet to people reaching out on the other side, just an attempt to meet someone else’s similar-but-not-the-same experiences in a just-close-enough way that both parties can join hands for a second and go “oh!! oh I understand! I hear you. *i hear you.”*

It’s not ever perfect because all humans AND all human societies AND all history are full of contradictions and bloody wounds and flaws and mess ups, and our media can’t exist without them whether they address specific ones or not. Those flaws are what drive story and emotion and growth and everything. It doesn’t make pain or evil good, it just makes it INHERENT. most poetry is not about joy. most of it is about heartbreak, even when the poem is happy. there’s no poem giving you seven lines of adulatory wonder about a dandelion without the promise and quiet understanding that it only matters bc that dandelion will be dead in days and the fact that it exists at all, in this moment one person has gotten to see, if this dandelion in full bloom in the sunlight on a summer morning when the neighborhood is still quiet, before the world wakes up and breathes, is a goddamn revolutionary miracle on a perfectly ordinary day that’s happened for 10,000 years at least.

It’s not that that moment particularly matters. It’s that the person wrote THAT one down out of everything, didn’t capture it the way it was but the way it felt, and sent it out to the rest of us and said “here is what life is” and we from infancy on somehow are able to take it in our hands and say I did not see this flower and I did not stand in your yard on that day or any other but friend, yes. yes I can see it because I have seen other flowers, because I have lived through a morning, because last Tuesday I lost my pet bird and today I heard a mourning dove sing, and then we take that poem that we understood without fully understanding and we pass it to someone else who also won’t fully understand but will hear and see ENOUGH and we say “here! look! see, this is what life is” and on and on and on it goes
