# Smallpox eradication, bioweapons engineering, and the risks most of the world doesn’t think about on a daily basis but which keep me up at night

```
_Anonymous on tumblr asked: **there’s illegal smallpox out there ???**_
```

I’m so sorry to be the bearer of bad news, but yes, unfortunately, there is.

So the quick background: smallpox is TERRIBLE. Most species on Earth have at least one pox virus that infects them, and sometimes they’re cross-species. Mousepox affects mice, monkeypox affects monkeys, etc. Cowpox can make humans sick, but not badly. That’s how we got the first smallpox vaccine! But smallpox has been killing millions and billions of people since like, at least 1000 years before Jesus was a bun in the oven or whatever. It’s been around so long that one particular culture even has a smallpox god because it was so influential. Smallpox is miserable, scarring, and often deadly. And it’s highly, HIGHLY contagious. It spent centuries evolving within human beings to become the ultimate human virus basically. LOUSY.

So anyway, fast forward some number of years, and a few people decide, what the hell, we’re gonna get rid of smallpox. We’re going to do this. So over several years, the WHO gathers this team and tackles every single outbreak of smallpox they find, they hunt down smallpox in villages, the second someone shows symptoms they use education and ring vaccination methods, etc., and in 1977, MIRACULOUSLY, against all odds, with an UNBELIEVABLE amount of sheer stubborn determination and round-the-clock work and SUPER devoted people and international cooperation across hundreds of borders, the very last natural case of smallpox finally ends. Only one person gets sick after that, a woman in (I think) the U.K., who dies, who got it from a lab.

In 1980, the WHO announces that smallpox has, after PAINSTAKING confirmation and hunting to make sure, indeed been FULLY ERADICATED from nature and no longer affects the human population. HUZZAH!!! That’s UNBELIEVABLE. It is GONE FROM THE WORLD. Hardly anyone thought it was even REMOTELY possible, and a small band of these crazy scientists and doctors and humanitarian workers actually did it. HUGE win, right??

Right. But it’s not quite so simple.

Problem number one is that there were a LOT of vials of smallpox particles in the world at that point. An order was put out to destroy all of them or send them in to the two designated places that could handle smallpox. The two sites chosen were both capable of highly secure Level 4 biocontainment of the smallpox virus, and the first was the CDC in the USA, and the second was VECTOR in what was then the USSR. And yet that didn’t solve the problem.

Because the thing is that after a LONG TIME of people getting sick with smallpox, and doctors and scientists researching it, there are a lot of samples of smallpox floating around labs around the world. And anyone who’s studied or worked in science labs for a while can confirm that those big fridges and freezers of samples tend to go a long, long time without being fully cleaned out sometimes. Especially storage ones, tucked in odd corners and rooms and stuff. When someone moves labs, or dies, or retires, they often disseminate stuff among other labs and people. So you’ll be going through old Dr. Whatshisface’s freezer, and oh look, a monkey brain!!! Those are expensive! That should go to one of the neuroscience researchers. And some HeLa cells, those are useful for nearly everyone, put out a memo and let one or two people claim those. And, uh, what the fuck—oh shit—smallpox? Is this really—uh. Hey. Someone get the phone number for the CDC and ask if they’ll come get this in spacesuits. How did that even GET HERE????

This has happened. It’ll probably continue to happen. There was the preserved smallpox-covered arm of a deceased 4 year old child found in the storage of a lab and sent in. An FDA lab found SIX sealed glass vials of smallpox in one of their labs in 2014! This happens. Even with the best intentions, unless you search every nook and cranny of every building and bunker in the world, there’s gonna be some missed. If you don’t know it’s there—and WHY would you suspect that in your, like, university storage freezers there might be SMALLPOX—you don’t _know_ to destroy it or send it in. It could be years before someone realizes what a sample is, and if it wasn’t labeled properly, or if labeling was switched, or any number of other terrible things, someone could end up literally exposed to smallpox while they’re trying to figure out what the sample even IS. Whoopsie! And that’s assuming everyone is 100% HONEST about having destroyed all the samples they had, and not kept any for safekeeping or to sell to the highest black market bidder.

Problem number two is that no matter how many peace treaties and ethics agreements and human rights declarations the world agrees to, there are always groups and people out there who don’t care and are willing to do anything necessary to get a leg up over their enemies, especially with things like nuclear, chemical, and biological warfare. Not all of them will manage to GET the substances they want to work with, but some do. And sometimes they get HANDED the substance. Like Russia did. Biopreparat, their Soviet-Union-era EXTREMELY classified biowarfare program, was both MASSIVE and an unyielding machine. The rest of the world had no idea it even existed until the very late 90s, at which point someone in the program defected and spilled secrets to UK secret intelligence, who shared it with the US.

And it was bad. Not only did Biopreparat and the military form plans for weaponizing anthrax, Marburg, Ebola, smallpox, and more, they had been bioengineering them to be even WORSE.

They took the plague (yes, THAT plague. THE plague.), and made it stronger and stronger until it was resistant to every known antibiotic in Western medicine. They took the extremely hot and deadly India-1 strain of smallpox (which they had since 1959, but didn’t really start “improving” until 1987) and kept working with it further and further until it was even worse than before. They designed special warhead systems for the weaponized deployment of all kinds of these bacteria and viruses, and kept tons (the measurement, not hyperbole) in storage at the ready.

We have no evidence that they actually destroyed any of these stocks OR their methods of creating them OR their instructions on how to do so when they finally “outlawed” the whole shebang. Most experts agree that the strains are definitely around still. And in addition, intelligence agencies believe up to 4 other nations probably have strains of viable smallpox “illegally”, including North Korea, and there’s really…nothing we can do about that.

So. Yeah. There’s definitely a MINIMUM of Russia’s illegal bioengineered smallpox strains out there still. And a group of scientists recently completely recreated an extinct (I’m using that term loosely here, since viruses aren’t alive, remember) strain of horsepox from its recorded genetic code—which, guess what, we recorded from smallpox for posterity and historic purposes. They managed to do it while staying under $100,000. Their point was, is the retention vs. destruction even relevant at this point, when someone can do that? And with the ways even small labs can bioengineer, in one experiment, say, mousepox, to be 100% fatal and overcome all mouse resistance and vaccines just by tweaking one gene thing (yes, that happened, and yes, they had a poster up about it at an international convention about viruses and stuff that ALL KINDS OF COUNTRIES were at. The few scientists there who read it AND understood the implications at that time (years back) nearly lost their minds.).

This isn’t meant to scare anyone, because like, realistically? You’re a million times more likely to die from a bad influenza strain or like tripping and hitting your head or having a car crash than you are to ever encounter anthrax or the plague or Ebola or smallpox. But the threat IS real, and there _is_ hidden smallpox in pockets around the world in secret, and it’s lousy.

There’s a great, if slightly outdated, book on this called _The Devil in the Freezer_ that talks about both anthrax and the whole smallpox saga! I super duper recommend it. It’s a really engaging, sort of novel-style read while being totally nonfiction and accessible to every reader even if they have no science background!
